Neither my husband nor theslave return'd,
That in such haste I sentto seek his master!
Sure, Luciana, it is twoo'clock.
Perhaps some merchant hathinvited him,
And from the mart he'ssomewhere gone to dinner.
Good sister, let us dineand never fret:
A man is master of hisliberty:
Time is their master, and,when they see time,
They'll go or come: if so,be patient, sister.
Why should their libertythan ours be more?
Because their businessstill lies out o' door.
Look, when I serve him so,he takes it ill.
O, know he is the bridleof your will.
There's none but asseswill be bridled so.
Why, headstrong liberty islash'd with woe.
There's nothing situateunder heaven's eye
But hath his bound, inearth, in sea, in sky:
The beasts, the fishes,and the winged fowls,
Are their males' subjectsand at their controls:
Men, more divine, themasters of all these,
Lords of the wide worldand wild watery seas,
Indued with intellectualsense and souls,
Of more preeminence thanfish and fowls,
Are masters to theirfemales, and their lords:
Then let your will attendon their accords.
This servitude makes youto keep unwed.
Not this, but troubles ofthe marriage-bed.
But, were you wedded, youwould bear some sway.
Ere I learn love, I'llpractise to obey.
How if your husband startsome other where?
Till he come home again, Iwould forbear.
Patience unmoved! nomarvel though she pause;
They can be meek that haveno other cause.
A wretched soul, bruisedwith adversity,
We bid be quiet when wehear it cry;
But were we burdened withlike weight of pain,
As much or more would weourselves complain:
So thou, that hast nounkind mate to grieve thee,
With urging helplesspatience wouldst relieve me,
But, if thou live to seelike right bereft,
This fool-begg'd patiencein thee will be left.
Well, I will marry oneday, but to try.
Here comes your man; nowis your husband nigh.
Say, is your tardy masternow at hand?
Nay, he's at two hands withme, and that my two ears
can witness.
Say, didst thou speak withhim?
know'st thou hismind?
Ay, ay, he told his mindupon mine ear:
Beshrew his hand, I scarcecould understand it.
Spake he so doubtfully,
thou couldst not feel hismeaning?
Nay, he struck so plainly, Icould too well feel his blows;
and withal so doubtfullythat I could scarce
understand them.
But say, I prithee,is he coming home?
It seems he hath greatcare to please his wife.
Why, mistress, sure mymaster is horn-mad.
Horn-mad, thou villain!
I mean not cuckold-mad;
But, sure, he is starkmad.
When I desired him to comehome to dinner,
He ask'd me for a thousandmarks in gold:
''Tis dinner-time,' quothI; 'My gold!' quoth he;
'Your meat doth burn,' quothI; 'My gold!' quoth he:
'Will you come home?'quoth I;
'My gold!' quoth he.
'Where is the thousand marksI gave thee, villain?'
'The pig,' quoth I, 'isburn'd;'
'My gold!' quothhe:
'My mistress, sir' quothI; 'Hang up thy mistress!
I know not thy mistress;out on thy mistress!'
Quoth who?
Quoth my master:
'I know,' quoth he, 'nohouse, no wife, no mistress.'
So that my errand, dueunto my tongue,
I thank him, I bare homeupon my shoulders;
For, in conclusion, he didbeat me there.
Go back again, thou slave,and fetch him home.
Go back again, and be newbeaten home?
For God's sake, send someother messenger.
Back, slave, or I willbreak thy pate across.
And he will bless thatcross with other beating:
Between you I shall have aholy head.
Hence, prating peasant!fetch thy master home.
Am I so round with you asyou with me,
That like a football youdo spurn me thus?
You spurn me hence, and hewill spurn me hither:
If I last in this service,you must case me in leather.
Fie, how impatienceloureth in your face!
His company must do hisminions grace,
Whilst I at home starvefor a merry look.
Hath homely age thealluring beauty took
From my poor cheek? thenhe hath wasted it:
Are my discourses dull?barren my wit?
If voluble and sharpdiscourse be marr'd,
Unkindness blunts it morethan marble hard:
Do their gay vestments hisaffections bait?
That's not my fault: he'smaster of my state:
What ruins are in me thatcan be found,
By him not ruin'd? then ishe the ground
Of my defeatures. Mydecayed fair
A sunny look of his wouldsoon repair
But, too unruly deer, hebreaks the pale
And feeds from home; poorI am but his stale.
Self-harming jealousy!fie, beat it hence!
Unfeeling fools can withsuch wrongs dispense.
I know his eye doth homageotherwhere,
Or else what lets it buthe would be here?
Sister, you know hepromised me a chain;
Would that alone, alone hewould detain,
So he would keep fairquarter with his bed!
I see the jewel bestenamelled
Will lose his beauty; yetthe gold bides still,
That others touch, andoften touching will
Wear gold: and no man thathath a name,
By falsehood andcorruption doth it shame.
Since that my beautycannot please his eye,
I'll weep what's leftaway, and weeping die.
How many fond fools servemad jealousy!
The gold I gave to Dromiois laid up
Safe at the Centaur; andthe heedful slave
Is wander'd forth, in careto seek me out
By computation and minehost's report.
I could not speak withDromio since at first
I sent him from the mart.See, here he comes.
How now sir! is your merryhumour alter'd?
As you love strokes, sojest with me again.
You know no Centaur? youreceived no gold?
Your mistress sent to haveme home to dinner?
My house was at thePhoenix? Wast thou mad,
That thus so madly thoudidst answer me?
What answer, sir? whenspake I such a word?
Even now, even here, nothalf an hour since.
I did not see you sinceyou sent me hence,
Home to the Centaur, withthe gold you gave me.
Villain, thou didst denythe gold's receipt,
And told'st me of amistress and a dinner;
For which, I hope, thoufelt'st I was displeased.
I am glad to see you inthis merry vein:
What means this jest? Ipray you, master, tell me.
Yea, dost thou jeer andflout me in the teeth?
Think'st thou I jest? Hold,take thou that, and that.
Hold, sir, for God's sake!now your jest is earnest:
Upon what bargain do yougive it me?
Because that I familiarlysometimes
Do use you for my fool andchat with you,
Your sauciness will jestupon my love
And make a common of myserious hours.
When the sun shines letfoolish gnats make sport,
But creep in crannies whenhe hides his beams.
If you will jest with me,know my aspect,
And fashion your demeanorto my looks,
Or I will beat this methodin your sconce.
Sconce call you it? so youwould leave battering,
I had rather have it a head:an you use these blows long,
I must get a sconce formy head
and ensconce it too; orelse I shall seek my wit
in my shoulders.
But, I pray, sir why am Ibeaten?
Dost thou not know?
Nothing, sir, but that Iam beaten.
Shall I tell you why?
Ay, sir, and wherefore;
for they say every whyhath a wherefore.
Why, first,--for floutingme; and then, wherefore--
For urging it the secondtime to me.
Was there ever any manthus beaten out of season,
When in the whyand the wherefore
is neither rhyme nor reason?
Well, sir, I thank you.
Thank me, sir, for what?
For this something
that you gave mefor nothing.
I'll make you amends next,to give you nothing
for something. But say,sir, is it dinner-time?
No, sir; I think the meatwants that I have.
In good time, sir; what'sthat?
Basting.
Well, sir, then 'twill bedry.
If it be, sir, I pray you,eat none of it.
Your reason?
Lest it make you cholericand purchase me another
dry basting.
Well, sir, learn tojest in good time:
there's a time forall things.
I durst have denied that,
before you were socholeric.
By what rule, sir?
Marry, sir, by a rule asplain as the plain bald pate
of father Time himself.
Let's hear it.
There's no time for aman to recover his hair
that grows bald by nature.
Why is Time such a niggardof hair, being, as it is,
so plentiful an excrement?
Because it is a blessingthat he bestows on beasts;
and what he hath scantedmen in hair
he hath giventhem in wit.
I knew it would be a bold conclusion.
But, soft! who wafts usyonder?
Ay, ay, Antipholus, lookstrange and frown:
Some other mistress haththy sweet aspects;
I am not Adriana nor thywife.
The time was once whenthou unurged wouldst vow
That never words weremusic to thine ear,
That never object pleasingin thine eye,
That never touch wellwelcome to thy hand,
That never meatsweet-savor'd in thy taste,
Unless I spake, or look'd,or touch'd,
or carved tothee.
How comes it now, myhusband, O, how comes it,
That thou art thusestranged from thyself?
Thyself I call it, beingstrange to me,
That, undividable,incorporate,
Am better than thy dearself's better part.
Ah, do not tear awaythyself from me!
For know, my love, as easymayest thou fall
A drop of water in thebreaking gulf,
And take unmingled thatsame drop again,
Without addition ordiminishing,
As take from me thyselfand not me too.
How dearly would it touchme to the quick,
Shouldst thou but hear Iwere licentious
And that this body,consecrate to thee,
By ruffian lust should becontaminate!
Wouldst thou not spit atme and spurn at me
And hurl the name ofhusband in my face
And tear the stain'd skinoff my harlot-brow
And from my false hand cutthe wedding-ring
And break it with adeep-divorcing vow?
I know thou canst; andtherefore see thou do it.
I am possess'd with anadulterate blot;
My blood is mingled withthe crime of lust:
For if we too be one andthou play false,
I do digest the poison ofthy flesh,
Being strumpeted by thycontagion.
Keep then far league andtruce with thy true bed;
I live unstain'd, thouundishonoured.
Plead you to me, fairdame? I know you not:
In Ephesus I am but twohours old,
As strange unto your townas to your talk;
Who, every word by all mywit being scann'd,
Want wit in all one wordto understand.
Fie, brother! how theworld is changed with you!
When were you wont to usemy sister thus?
She sent for you by Dromiohome to dinner.
By Dromio?
By me?
By thee;
Did you converse, sir,with this gentlewoman?
What is the course anddrift of your compact?
I, sir? I never saw hertill this time.
Villain, thou liest; foreven her very words
Didst thou deliver to meon the mart.
I never spake with her inall my life.
How can she thus then callus by our names,
Unless it be byinspiration.
How ill agrees it withyour gravity
To counterfeit thusgrossly with your slave,
Abetting him to thwart mein my mood!
Be it my wrong you arefrom me exempt,
But wrong not that wrongwith a more contempt.
Come, I will fasten onthis sleeve of thine:
Thou art an elm, myhusband, I a vine,
Whose weakness, married tothy stronger state,
Makes me with thy strengthto communicate:
If aught possess thee fromme, it is dross,
Usurping ivy, brier, oridle moss;
Who, all for want ofpruning, with intrusion
Infect thy sap and live onthy confusion.
To me she speaks; shemoves me for her theme:
What, was I married to herin my dream?
Or sleep I now and think Ihear all this?
What error drives our eyesand ears amiss?
Until I know this sureuncertainty,
I'll entertain the offer'dfallacy.
Dromio, go bid the servantsspread for dinner.
O, for my beads! I crossme for a sinner.
This is the fairy land: Ospite of spites!
We talk with goblins, owlsand sprites:
If we obey them not, thiswill ensue,
They'll suck our breath, orpinch us black and blue.
Why pratest thou tothyself and answer'st not?
Dromio, thou drone, thousnail, thou slug, thou sot!
I am transformed, master,am I not?
I think thou art in mind,and so am I.
Nay, master, both in mindand in my shape.
Thou hast thine own form.
No, I am an ape.
If thou art changed toaught, 'tis to an ass.
'Tis true; she rides meand I long for grass.
'Tis so, I am an ass; elseit could never be
But I should know her aswell as she knows me.
Come, come, no longer willI be a fool,
To put the finger in theeye and weep,
Whilst man and masterlaugh my woes to scorn.
Come, sir, to dinner.
Dromio, keep the gate.
Husband, I'll dine abovewith you to-day
And shrive you of athousand idle pranks.
Sirrah, if any ask you foryour master,
Say he dines forth, andlet no creature enter.
Come, sister. Dromio, playthe porter well.
Am I in earth, in heaven,or in hell?
Sleeping or waking? mad orwell-advised?
Known unto these, and tomyself disguised!
I'll say as they say andpersever so,
And in this mist at alladventures go.
Master, shall I be porterat the gate?
Ay; and let none enter,lest I break your pate.
Come, come, Antipholus, wedine too late.